This is a "plugin" for the Video Disk Recorder (VDR).

Written by:                  Sascha Volkenandt <sascha@akv-soft.de>
Current maintainer:          Frank Schmirler <vdrdev@schmirler.de>

Project's homepage:          http://streamdev.vdr-developer.org/
Former project homepage:     http://linux.kompiliert.net/

Latest version available at: http://streamdev.vdr-developer.org/

See the file COPYING for license information.

Contents:
---------

1.   Description
2.   Installation
2.1  Compatibility
2.2  Compiling
2.3  Updating
3.   Usage
3.1  Usage HTTP server
3.2  Usage IGMP multicast server
3.3  Usage VDR-to-VDR server
3.4  Usage VDR-to-VDR client
4.   Other useful Plugins
4.1  Plugins for VDR-to-VDR clients
4.2  Plugins for Server
4.3  Alternatives
5.   externremux.sh
6.   Known Problems


1. Description:
---------------

This PlugIn is a VDR implementation of the VTP (Video Transfer Protocol) 
Version 0.0.3 (see file PROTOCOL) and a basic HTTP Streaming Protocol.

It consists of a server and a client part, but both parts are compiled together
with the PlugIn source, but appear as separate PlugIns to VDR. 

The client part acts as a full Input Device, so it can be used in conjunction 
with a DXR3-Card, XINE, SoftDevice or others to act as a working VDR 
installation without any DVB-Hardware including EPG-Handling.

The server part acts as a Receiver-Device and works transparently in the 
background within your running VDR. It can serve multiple clients and it can
distribute multiple input streams (i.e. from multiple DVB-cards) to multiple 
clients using the native VTP protocol (for VDR-clients), or using the HTTP 
protocol supporting clients such as XINE, MPlayer and so on. With XMMS or
WinAMP, you can also listen to radio channels over a HTTP connection.

It is possible to attach as many clients as the bus and network can handle, as
long as there is a device which can receive a specific channel. Multiple
channels homed on the same transponder (which is determined by it's frequency)
can be broadcasted with a single device.

Additional clients can be programmed using the Protocol Instructions inside
the PROTOCOL file.


2. Installation:
----------------

Let's say streamdev's version is 0.5.0 and vdr's version is 1.X.X. If you 
use anything else please exchange the version numbers appropriately (this
way I don't have to update this section all the times;) ).

After compiling the PlugIn as stated below, start either (or both) parts of it
by specifying "-P streamdev-client" and/or "-P streamdev-server" on the VDR
command line.

What's important is that the client requests a channel using its Unique Channel
ID. So, in order to find the channel at the server, it must have the same ID
that is used on the client. You can achieve this by putting the server's 
channels.conf on the client, preferably after scanning.

If you want to drive additional Input-Devices (with different sources) on the 
client, you can merge the channels.conf files. VDR will detect if the local 
device or the network device can receive the channels.

Last, but not least you have to copy the streamdev-server folder into the
"plugins/streamdev-server" subfolder of VDR's config-directory (which is equal
to your video-directory if not specified otherwise). For example, if you didn't
specify a separate config-directory, and set your video directory to "/video0",
the directory has to be copied to /video0/plugins/streamdev-server.

The directory contains a file named streamdevhosts.conf which you must adjust
to your needs. The syntax is the same as for svdrphosts.conf, so please consult
VDR's documentation on how to fill that file, if you can't do it on-the-fly.

There's also a sample externremux.sh script in this directory. It is used by
streamdev's external remux feature. The sample script uses mencoder by default.
Please check the script for further information. You can specify a different
script location with the -r parameter. The VDR commandline would then include a
"-P 'streamdev-server -r /usr/local/bin/remux.sh'". Note the additional quotes,
as otherwise -r will be passed to VDR and not to streamdev.


2.1 Compatibility:
------------------

This version is not compatible to VDR releases older than 1.5.9. Take one of
the streamdev-0.4.x releases if you are running at least VDR 1.4.x. For older
VDRs you will probably need one of the streamdev-0.3.x releases.

2.2 Compiling:
--------------

  cd vdr-1.X.X/PLUGINS/src
  tar xvfz vdr-streamdev-0.5.0.tgz
  ln -s streamdev-0.5.0 streamdev
  cp -r streamdev/streamdev-server VDRCONFDIR/plugins/
  cd ../..
  make [options, if necessary] vdr
  make [options, if necessary] plugins

To build only the plugin, change into the streamdev source folder and issue
  make

To build only streamdev-server or only streamdev-client, use
  make server
  make client

2.3  Updating:
--------------

If you are updating streamdev from an earlier release, you might have to
perform some additional steps. Check which version you've been running before,
then read below for the necessary changes.

* Location of files:
--------------------
(Affected: 0.3.x, 0.4.x, 0.4.0pre, 0.5.0pre)

Starting with streamdev 0.5.0, all additional files are kept in a directory
called "streamdev-server" inside VDR's plugin config directory. It is the new
default location of externremux.sh and the new place where streamdev-server
expects the file "streamdevhosts.conf". You will have to move this file to its
new location:

streamdev 0.3.x:
  mv VDRCONFDIR/plugins/streamdevhosts.conf VDRCONFDIR/plugins/streamdev-server/

streamdev 0.4.x, 0.4.0pre and 0.5.0pre:
  mv VDRCONFDIR/plugins/streamdev VDRCONFDIR/plugins/streamdev-server/

Now check the contents of streamdevhosts.conf. Does it contain a "0.0.0.0/0"
entry? If your VDR machine is connected to the Internet, this line gives
*anyone* full access to streamdev, unless you took some other measures to
prevent this (e.g. firewall). You might want to remove this line and enable
HTTP authentication instead.

* Handling of externremux script:
---------------------------------
(Affected: 0.3.x, 0.4.0pre, 0.5.0pre)

Streamdev server's externremux script became responsible for emitting all HTTP
headers. A quick and dirty extension to your current script would be:

  echo -ne 'Content-type: video/mpeg\r\n'
  echo -ne '\r\n'

However I encourage you to try the new externremux.sh script shipped with the
streamdev source distribution.

To emphasize the required change in externremux, the URL path for passing the
stream through externremux has changed from EXTERN to EXT.

3. Usage:
---------

Start the server core itself by specifying -Pstreamdev-server on your VDR 
commandline. To use the client core, specify -Pstreamdev-client. Both parts
can run in one VDR instance, if necessary.

On the server, the main menu entry "Streamdev Connections" gives you a list
of currently connected clients. Use the "red" key to terminate a connection.
Note that depending on connection type and client, the client might re-connect
sooner or later. Depending on the server setup, the "blue" key might be enabled
as well. Please read below.

The parameter "Suspend behaviour" allows you to specify how the server should 
react in case the client requests a channel that would require switching the
primary device (i.e. disrupt live-tv). If set to "Offer suspend mode", you
enable the "blue" key in the server's main menu. It will put the server into
"Suspend Mode" (a picture is displayed on TV). Then, a client may switch the
primary card to wherever it likes to. While watching TV (Suspend deactivated),
the client may not switch the transponder on the primary device.  If you set
the behaviour to "Always suspended" (the default), there will be normal live-tv
on the server, but whenever a client decides to switch the transponder, the 
server will lose it's live-tv. Set to "Never suspended", the server always 
prevents the client from switching transponders. If you set "Client may 
suspend" to yes, the client can suspend the server remotely (this only applies
if "Offer suspend mode" is selected).

NOTE: This mainly applies to One-Card-Systems, since with multiple cards there
is no need to switch transponders on the primary interface, if on of the other
cards is idle (i.e. if it is not blocked by a recording). If all cards are in
use (i.e. when something is recorded, or by multiple clients), this applies to
Multiple-Card-Systems as well.

3.1 Usage HTTP server:
----------------------

You can use the HTTP part by accessing the server with a HTTP-capable media
player (such as XINE, MPlayer, and so on, if you have appropriate MPEG2-codecs
installed). In the PlugIn's Setup, you can specify the port the server will
listen to with the parameter "HTTP Server Port". The parameter "HTTP Streamtype"
allows you to specify a default stream type, which is used if no specific type
has been requested in the URL (see below). The supported stream types are:

  TS     Transport Stream (i.e. a dump from the device)
  PES    Packetized Elemetary Stream (VDR's native recording format)
  PS     Program Stream (SVCD, DVD like stream)
  ES     Elementary Stream (only Video, if available, otherwise only Audio)
  EXT    Pass stream through external script (e.g. for converting with mencoder)

Assuming that you leave the default port (3000), point your web browser to

  http://hostname:3000/

You will be presented a menu with links to various channel lists, including M3U
playlist formats.

If you don't want to use the HTML menu or the M3U playlists, you can access the
streams directly like this:

  http://hostname:3000/3
  http://hostname:3000/S19.2E-0-12480-898

The first one will deliver a channel by number on the server, the second one
will request the channel by unique channel id. In addition, you can specify 
the desired stream type as a path to the channel.

  http://hostname:3000/TS/3
  http://hostname:3000/PES/S19.2E-0-12480-898

The first one would deliver the stream in TS, the second one in PES format. 
Possible values are 'PES', 'TS', 'PS', 'ES' and 'EXT'. You need to specify
the ES format explicitly if you want to listen to radio channels. Play them
back i.e. with mpg123.

  mpg123 http://hostname:3000/ES/200

With 'EXT' you can also add parameters which are passed as arguments to the
externremux script (e.g. http://hostname:3000/EXT;param1=value1;param2=value2/3)
Check your externremux.sh script for the parameters it understands. For details
on how to modify or write your own externremux.sh, please see the chapter upon
externremux.sh further down.

If you want to access streamdev's HTTP server from the Internet, do *not* grant
access for anyone by allowing any IP in "streamdevhosts.conf". Instead, pass the
"-a" commandline option to streamdev-server. It takes a username and a password
as argument. Clients with an IP not accepted by "streamdevhosts.conf" will then
have to login. The VDR commandline will have to look like this:

  vdr ... -P 'streamdev-server -a vdr:secret' ...

Note the single quotes, as otherwise "-a" will be passed to VDR and not to
streamdev-server. The login ("vdr" in the example above) doesn't have to exist
as a system account.

3.2 Usage IGMP multicast server:
--------------------------------

IGMP based multicast streaming is often used by settop boxes to receive IP TV.
Streamdev's multicast server allows you to feed live TV from VDR to such a
settop box. VLC is known to work well if you look for a software client.

The advantage of multicasting is that the actual stream is sent out only once,
regardless of how many clients want to receive it. The downside is, that you
cannot simply multicast across network boundaries. You need multicast routers.
For multicast streaming over the public Internet you would even need to register
for your own IP range. So don't even think of multicasting via Internet with
streamdev! Streamdev will send the stream only to one local ethernet segment and
all clients must be connected to this same segment. There must not be a router
inbetween. Also note that the client must not run on the streamdev-server
machine.

Each channel is offered on a different multicast IP. Channel 1 is available from
multicast IP 239.255.0.1, channel 2 from 239.255.0.2 and so on. The upper limit
is 239.255.254.255 which corresponds to channel 65279 (239.255.255.0/24 is
reserved according to RFC-2365).

Before you can use streamdev's multicast server, you might need to patch VDR.
Binding an IGMP socket is a privileged operation, so you must start VDR as root.
If you pass the -u option to VDR, it will drop almost all priviledges before
streamdev is even loaded. In VDR < 1.7.22 this prevented streamdev from binding
the socket. Apply either patch vdr-1.6.0-cap_net_raw.diff (VDR < 1.7.5) or
vdr-1.7.21-cap_net_raw.diff (VDR < 1.7.22) to keep VDR from dropping capability
CAP_NET_RAW. The patch is part of streamdev's source distribution. Check the
patches subdirectory. There's no need to patchif you are running VDR >= 1.7.22
or if VDR is kept running as root (not recommended).

The multicast server is disabled by default. Enter the streamdev-server setup
menu to enable it and - IMPORTANT - bind the multicast server to the IP of your
VDR server's LAN ethernet card. The multicast server will refuse to start with
the default bind adresse "0.0.0.0".

Now edit your streamdevhosts.conf. To allow streaming of all channels, it must
contain "239.255.0.0/16". Note that you cannot limit connections by client IP
here. You can however restrict which channels are allowed to be multicasted.
Enter individual multicast IPs instead of "239.255.0.0/16".

By default, the linux kernel will refuse to join more than 20 multicast groups.
You might want to increase this up to "number_of_channels + 1". Note that it's
"number_of_channels", not "maximum_channel_number".

  #First 100 channels:
  bash# sysctl -w net.ipv4.igmp_max_memberships=101

  #All channels:
  bash# COUNT=$(grep -c '^[^:]' PATH_TO_YOUR/channels.conf)
  bash# sysctl -w net.ipv4.igmp_max_memberships=$((COUNT + 1))

You need to run the sysctl command *before* VDR is started. The setting is lost
after the next reboot. Check the documentation of your Linux distro on how to
make the setting persist (i.e. have your distro change the value for you as
part of the boot procedure). Most likely /etc/sysctl.conf is your friend.

A multicast server never knows how many clients are actually receiving a stream.
If a client signals that it leaves a multicast group, the server has to query
for other listeners before it can stop the stream. This may delay zapping from
one transponder to an other. The client will probably requests the new channel
before the previous stream has been stopped. If there's no free DVB card, VDR
won't be able to fulfill the request until a DVB card becomes available and the
client resends the request.

3.3 Usage VDR-to-VDR server:
----------------------------

You can activate the VDR-to-VDR server part in the PlugIn's Setup Menu. It is
deactivated by default. The Parameter "VDR-to-VDR Server Port" specifies the 
port where you want the server to listen for incoming connections. The server
will be activated when you push the OK button inside the setup menu, so there's
no need to restart VDR.

If both, streamdev-client and streamdev-server are installed, the additional
option "Loop prevention" will show up in the streamdev-server setup. If enabled,
streamdev-client won't be considered when streamdev-server is looking for a
device which is able to receive some channel. This is required if two or more
VDRs mutually share their DVB devices through streamdev. Otherwise you would
end up in a loop.

3.4 Usage VDR-to-VDR client:
----------------------------

Streamdev-client adds a "Suspend Server" item to VDR's mainmenu. With the
setup parameter "Hide Mainmenu Entry" you can hide this menu item if you don't
need it. "Suspend Server" is only useful if the server runs in "Offer suspend
mode" with "Client may suspend" enabled.

The parameter "Remote IP" uses an IP-Adress-Editor, where you can just enter
the IP number with the number keys on your remote. After three digits (or if 
the next digit would result in an invalid IP adress, or if the first digit is
0), the current position jumps to the next one. You can change positions with 
the left and right buttons, and you can cycle the current position using up 
and down. To confirm the entered address, press OK. So, if you want to enter 
the IP address "127.0.0.1", just mark the corresponding entry as active and 
type "127001<OK>" on your remote. If you want to enter "192.168.1.12", type 
"1921681<Right>12<OK>". 

The parameters "Remote IP" and "Remote Port" in the client's setup specify the 
address of the remote VDR-to-VDR server to connect to. Activate the client by
setting "Start Client" to yes. It is disabled by default, because it wouldn't
make much sense to start the client without specifying a server anyway. The 
client is activated after you push the OK button, so there's no need to restart
VDR. Deactivation on-the-fly is not possible, so in order to deactivate the 
client, you will have to restart VDR. However requests to switch channels will
be refused by streamdev-client once it has been deactivated. All other settings
can be changed without restarting VDR.

The client will try to connect to the server (in case it isn't yet) whenever 
a remote channel is requested. Just activate the client and switch to a 
channel that's not available by local devices. If anything goes wrong with the 
connection between the two, you will see it in the logfile instantly. If you 
now switch the client to a channel which isn't covered by it's own local
devices, it will ask the server for it. If the server can (currently) receive
that channel, the client will show it until you switch again, or until the 
server needs that card (if no other is free) for a recording on a different 
transponder.

Only the needed PIDs are transferred, and additional PIDs can be turned on
during an active transfer. This makes it possible to switch languages, receive
additional channels (for recording on the client) and use plugins that use
receivers themselves (like osdteletext).

The default timeout of 2 seconds for network operations should be sufficient in
most cases. Increase "Timeout" if you get frequent timeout errors in the log.

With "Filter Streaming" enabled, the client will receive meta information like
EPG data and service information, just as if the client had its own DVB card.
Link channels and even a client-side EPG scan have been reported to work.

The precedence among multiple client VDRs receiving live TV from the same
server is controlled with "Live TV Priority".

With "Maximum Priority" and "Minimum Priority" you can keep VDR from considering
streamdev in certain cases. If for instance you have a streamdev client with its
own DVB card, VDR might use streamdev for recording. If this is not what you
want, you could set the maximum priority to 0. As recordings usually have a much
higher priority (default 50), streamdev is now no longer used for recordings.
The two parameters define the inclusive range of priorities for which streamdev
will accept to tune. Setting the minimum priority to a higher value than the
maximum, you will get two ranges: "up to maximum" and "minimum and above".

If you are running at least VDR 1.7.0, you can also configure the "Broadcast
Systems / Cost" of the streamdev-client device. On a pure streamdev-client only
system it doesn't matter what you configure here. But if your client is equipped
with a DVB card, you should read on. VDR always prefers the cheapest device
in terms of supported broadcast systems and modulations. A DVB-S2 card supports
two broadcast systems (DVB-S and DVB-S2). From VDR 1.7.15 on, the supported
modulations are counted as well (QPSK, QAM32/64/128/256, VSB8/16, TURBO_FEC).
So for a DVB-S2 card which does QPSK you'll get a total cost of three. A DVB-C
card (one broadcast system) which can do QAM32,QAM64,QAM128,QAM256 would give
you a total of five. Check your log for "frontend ... provides ... with ..."
messages to find out the cost of your DVB cards. Then pick a suitable value for
streamdev-client. With equal costs, VDR will usually prefer the DVB card and
take streamdev for recordings. If streamdev's costs are higher, live TV will
use your DVB card until a recordings kicks in. Then the recording will take the
DVB card and live TV will be shifted to streamdev (you'll notice a short
interruption of live TV).

Note that streamdev-client acts similar to a DVB card. It is possible to receive
multiple channels simultaneously, but only from the same transponder. Just add
additional instances of streamdev-client and you will be able to receive as many
transponders at a time. The same trick allows a client to receive channels from
different servers. To create an additional instance, copy the streamdev-client
binary to a different name (e.g. streamdev-client2):

  cd VDRPLUGINLIBDIR
  cp libvdr-streamdev-client.so.1.X.X libvdr-streamdev-client2.so.1.X.X

Now add -Pstreamdev-client2 to the VDR commandline. In the VDR plugin setup
a second streamdev-client entry should show up. Both instances have to be
configured individually.


4. Other useful Plugins:
------------------------

4.1 Plugins for VDR-to-VDR clients:
-----------------------------------

The following plugins are useful for VDR-to-VDR clients (i.e. VDRs running the
streamdev-client):

* remotetimers (http://vdr.schmirler.de/)
Add, edit, delete timers on client and server

* timersync (http://phivdr.dyndns.org/vdr/vdr-timersync/)
Automatically syncronizes timer lists of client and server. All recordings will
be made on the server

* remoteosd (http://vdr.schmirler.de/)
Provides access to the server's OSD menu
  
* epgsync (http://vdr.schmirler.de/)
Import EPG from server VDR

* femon (http://www.saunalahti.fi/~rahrenbe/vdr/femon/)
Display signal information from server's DVB card. SVDRP support must be enabled
in femon's setup

4.2 Plugins for Server:
-----------------------

* dummydevice (http://phivdr.dyndns.org/vdr/vdr-dummydevice/)
Recommended on a headless server (i.e. a server with no real output device).
Without this plugin, a budget DVB card could become VDR's primary device. This
causes unwanted sideeffects in certain situations.

4.3 Alternatives:
-----------------

* xineliboutput (http://phivdr.dyndns.org/vdr/vdr-xineliboutput/)
With its networking option, xineliboutput provides an alternative to streamdev.
You will get the picture of the server VDR, including its OSD. However you
won't get independent clients, as they all share the same output.

5. externremux.sh:
------------------

When selecting streamtype "EXT", the TS stream from VDR is passed through an
external program for further processing. By default a script installed at
VDRCONFDIR/plugins/streamdev/externremux.sh is expected, however you may
specify a different location as parameter -r to the streamdev-server plugin
(see chapter upon Installation above).

The TS stream is passed to the script on stdin, the resulting stream is expected
on stdout. The following parameters are passed to the script in the environment:

* Information on the channel:
  REMUX_CHANNEL_ID    VDR channel ID
  REMUX_CHANNEL_NAME  Channel name
  REMUX_VTYPE         Video type (2 for MPEG-2)
  REMUX_VPID          Video PID (undefined if audio only)
  REMUX_PPID          PCR PID (undefined if equal to VPID)
  REMUX_TPID          Teletext PID (undefined if not available)
  REMUX_APID          Space separated list of audio pids
  REMUX_ALANG         Space separated list of audio languages
  REMUX_DPID          Space separated list of dolby pids
  REMUX_DLANG         Space separated list of dolby languages
  REMUX_SPID          Space separated list of subtitle pids
  REMUX_SLANG         Space separated list of subtitle languages
  REMUX_PARAM_*       All (user supplied) parameters (e.g. REMUX_PARAM_x)

* Information on the connection (CGI like)
  REMOTE_ADDR         Client IP
  SERVER_NAME         Local IP
  SERVER_PORT         Local port
  SERVER_PROTOCOL     Streamdev protocol (HTTP, VTP, IGMP)
  SERVER_SOFTWARE     Streamdev version
  All HTTP headers converted to uppercase, '-' replaced by '_' (e.g. USER_AGENT)

The script should perform the following steps (pseudocode):

  if (SERVER_PROTOCOL == HTTP)
    write headers (including Content-Type) to STDOUT
    write empty line to STDOUT
    if (REQUEST_METHOD == HEAD)
      exit
    endif
  endif
  while (read STDIN)
    remux to STDOUT
  wend

  onSIGINT/SIGKILL: cleanup and exit


6. Known Problems:
------------------

* There have been reports that channel switching with VDR 1.5.x/1.6.x clients
sometimes fails. Current version includes a workaround which seems to work, but
YMMV ;)

* Viewing encrypted channels became an issue with VDR's new CAM handling code.
Streamdev doesn't provide a (dummy) CAM, so out of the box, VDR won't ever try
to receive encrypted channels from streamdev. Pick one of the following
solutions to work around the problem:

1. Force VDR to use streamdev. Open the channels menu on the client (or edit its
channels.conf if you know how to do this) and set the CA field of all channels
that only the server can decrypt to streamdev's device index. Usually streamdev
will get number 9 or 10. Streamdev logs the actual device number when starting
up. So please consider the logs for the correct value. Remember to fill in
hexadecimal values if you are using an editor to modify your channels.conf
(number 10 becomes an "a", number 11 a "b", ...).

2. Apply either patch "patches/vdr-1.6.0-intcamdevices.patch" or patch
"patches/vdr-1.6.0-ignore_missing_cam.diff" to your client VDR. Intcamdevices
is the clean solution, but it modifies the VDR API. So you will need to
recompile all of your plugins. The ignore_missing_cam patch is trivial, no need
to recompile other plugins. However it is not suitable for clients with a DVB
card of their own.
